HARI SREENIVASAN: Good evening.
I'm Hari Sreenivasan. Gwen Ifill
and Judy Woodruff are away.
On the "NewsHour" tonight: A
British report points the finger
at Russian President Vladimir
Putin for the radioactive
poisoning of a former KGB agent.
Also ahead: what Republican
presidential candidate Rand Paul
says are the differences between
him and front-runner
Donald Trump.
SEN. RAND PAUL (R-KY),
Presidential Candidate: Trump
wants power. And he thinks he's
so smart
that he will fix everything in
the country; just give him
power. And I understand the
corrupting influence of power.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And how a
place can inspire genius in its
people.
RICARDO HAUSMANN, Harvard Center
for International Development:
Genius is not really about
individuals.
It's really about a collective.
It's about a community of
practice.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All that and
more on tonight's "PBS
NewsHour."
(BREAK)
HARI SREENIVASAN: The
Mid-Atlantic and Northeast
braced today for a blizzard that
could affect
50 million people.
The storm is set to start
tomorrow afternoon and continue
into Sunday. Forecasts call for
up to two feet of snow in the
Washington, D.C., area. That has
sent people rushing to
grocery stores, as road crews
ready their equipment.
And governors in Virginia, North
Carolina and Maryland have
declared emergencies.
GOV. LARRY HOGAN (R), Maryland:
Our focus will be on clearing
all of the main state
highways, but a great deal will
also be demanded of local
authorities in the coming days.
They
will almost certainly be
overwhelmed by the amount of
snow and the effects of this
storm.
It could take days, or even up
to a week, for them to dig out
all local roads.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Even before
the blizzard, the Washington,
D.C., area was crippled
overnight,
when a dusting of snow turned to
ice on untreated roads.
Thousands of commuters,
including President
Obama's motorcade, were
stuck in long backups.
Secretary of State John Kerry
acknowledged today that Iran may
use money from sanctions
relief to support terror. The
country is receiving billions of
dollars in newly unfrozen
assets,
in exchange for curbing
its nuclear program.
On CNBC today, Kerry said
there's no way to stop funds
flowing to the hard-line Iran
Revolutionary
Guard Corps, for example.
JOHN KERRY, U.S. Secretary of
State: I think that some of it
will end up in the hands of
the IRGC or other entities, some
of which are labeled terrorists.
To some degree, I'm
not going to sit here and tell
you that every component of that
can be prevented. But I
can tell you this. Right now, we
are not seeing the early
delivery of funds going to that
kind of endeavor at
this point in time.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Kerry was in
Davos, Switzerland, at the World
Economic Summit. He said he
hopes
Iran will put sanctions money
into rebuilding its economy. But
several Senate Republicans
said it was always obvious that
terror groups would benefit.
Meanwhile, in Iran, President
Hassan Rouhani appealed for free
and fair elections next
month. Thousands of moderate
candidates, who would support
Rouhani's reform agenda, have
been disqualified by the
Guardian Council, made up of
Islamic clerics and jurists. The
council ruled they were not
loyal enough to the ruling
system.
Pakistan observed a nationwide
day of mourning today for 21
people killed at a university
by Taliban attackers. Students
held a protest and vigil in
Islamabad, urging the government
to do more to fight extremism.
They carried signs and lit
candles to honor the dead.
WOMAN: The fact that such
incidents continue to happen and
that these terror groups
continue
to act with such impunity is
clear evidence of the fact that
this state is willfully being
negligent of its duties.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Pakistani army
officials say yesterday's attack
was orchestrated from
inside neighboring Afghanistan.
Israel confirmed today that it
plans to appropriate 380 acres
of land in the occupied West
Bank.
It is the largest such action
since 2014, and it's already
being denounced by Palestinian
officials. The tract is located
near Jericho at the northern tip
of the Dead Sea. Israeli
authorities say the site is
already under Israeli control,
and no Palestinians live
there.
Back in this country, the Obama
administration is dialing back
new rules that required visas
for European travelers if they
had been to Iran, Iraq, Syria or
Sudan in the last five
years. An announcement today
said journalists, aid workers
and others may still be allowed
to enter the U.S. without visas.
The new requirements had
prompted objections from
European states.
And on Wall Street, stocks
managed a rebound, as oil prices
surged higher, and the European
Central Bank raised hopes for
additional stimulus efforts. The
Dow Jones industrial average
gained nearly 116 points to
close at 15882. The Nasdaq rose
a fraction of a point, and
the S&P 500 added nine.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
Could Russian President Vladimir
Putin be on the hook for
a poisoning?; presidential
candidate Rand Paul on the race
and the NSA; the first female
to be hired as a full-time
NFL coach; and much more.
The death by poisoning of a
former Russian spy in London was
thrust back into the headlines
today, as a British inquiry into
his killing released its report.
Alexander Litvinenko fled Russia
nearly 20 years ago and accused
the former chief of
Russia's spy agency,
now-President Vladimir Putin, of
corruption. In 2006, he met two
Russian spies at a London hotel,
and three weeks later, he was
dead.
Chris Ship of Independent
Television News begins our
coverage.
CHRIS SHIP: We were reminded
today that the radioactive
poison inside Alexander
Litvinenko's
body was so strong, he had to be
buried in a lead-lined coffin.
Today, the Russian security
service the FSB was blamed for
his killing. And the orders,
concluded the man who led
the inquiry, most likely came
from the top, the very top, he
said.
SIR ROBERT OWEN, Litvinenko
Inquiry Chairman: The operation
to kill Mr. Litvinenko was
probably
approved by Mr. Patrushev, then
head of the FSB, and also by
President Putin.
CHRIS SHIP: The FSB agents did
it by pouring a deadly
substance, polonium-210, into
this
teapot from which Mr.
Litvinenko was drinking.
This was him in a hotel lobby a
few moments before the meeting.
He took just three or
four sips of tea, he later told
police, but after he'd left the
hotel, the radiation had
already started to
spread through his body.
At the inquiry, the poisoning in
a meeting room at the hotel here
was referred to as
a mini-act of nuclear terrorism
on the streets of London. And
because the orders likely came
from the Kremlin, Mr.
Litvinenko's widow has demanded
today the strongest possible
response
from the British government.
MARINA LITVINENKO, Widow of
Alexander Litvinenko: It's time
for David Cameron. I'm calling
immediately
for complete expulsion from the
U.K. of all Russian intelligence
operatives.
CHRIS SHIP: Later, she told me
she hopes justice would catch up
with President Putin.
MARINA LITVINENKO: Yes, we know
not all dictators exist forever,
and, one day, you need to answer
for everything, what you did.
THERESA MAY, British Home
Secretary: This was a blatant
and unacceptable breach of the
most fundamental tenets of
international law and of
civilized behavior.
CHRIS SHIP: If there was any
doubt Litvinenko was a target of
the Russian state, watch this
video of Russian special forces
in training, their target,
Alexander Litvinenko.
But the man accused of the
poisoning, Andrei Lugovoi, now,
by the way, a senior Russian
politician, said today, "The
accusations against me are
absurd and once again confirm
London's
anti-Russian stance."
Nothing from President Putin
himself today, but Britain's
reliance on him in the fight
against I.S. in Syria may
limited the U.K.'s response for
a murder which turned this man
into this one days
before his death.
HARI SREENIVASAN: We dig deeper
into the story with Michael
McFaul, U.S. ambassador to
Russia
from 2012 to 2014. He's now a
professor at Stanford
University. And Steven Lee
Myers,
he covers foreign affairs and
national security at The New
York Times. He was based in
Russia
from 2002 to 2007. He's also the
author of "The New Tsar: The
Rise and Reign of Vladimir
Putin."
Steven Lee Myers, I want to ask
you first, who was this
individual that was killed?
STEVEN LEE MYERS, The New York
Times: Alexander Litvinenko was
a fairly obscure intelligence
officer in the KGB and then
later the FSB in the '90s,
wasn't very well-known until
he very sensationally came
forward with accusations that
the unit that he worked for was
involved
in corrupt activities and in
fact an assassination plot.
When he came forward at the time
-- this was in 1998 -- the
director of the FSB at the
time, the federal security
service, was Vladimir Putin.
HARI SREENIVASAN: So, Steven,
staying with you for a second,
in your reporting at the
time, a lot of people suspected
this. What did we learn today
from this report?
STEVEN LEE MYERS: You know,
people who followed this
inquiry, which really was an
extraordinary
process, might not be that
surprised by the conclusions
that were in it.
But I think the tone of it and
the accusation linking it,
though, with a caveat, to the
Kremlin and Putin himself is
really what was so striking, to
see all these facts laid out.
A lot of what was known about
this case dates back to the
investigation that happened in
2006 and 2007.
And when the British originally
charged the two suspects, you
know, many of the details
were you know, many of the
details were already known at
that time, but I think that
there
was an eagerness inside the U.K.
especially to learn more about
this case and who did
order it, and, you know, the
judge's report today took that
to the top of the Kremlin.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Michael
McFaul, does this change your
understanding of the events?
MICHAEL MCFAUL, Former U.S.
Ambassador to Russia: No.
I, too, like Steven, have
followed this case for a long
time both as an academic and
then
in the government. I have only
had a chance to skim the entire
report. I haven't read
everything, but I have read the
conclusions closely, and I want
to applaud them for doing
this. I think it's very
important, even if nothing more
comes of it, that somebody went
to the trouble to document all
this for history and so that
this has been recorded.
Having looked at it, there is no
new smoking gun. There is no
secret tape that recorded
Putin giving the order or Mr.
Patrushev giving the order, but
it just puts together the
circumstantial
evidence, which is to say that
these two agents came from
Moscow.
They had polonium, something you
can't just buy on the streets.
They poisoned him. They
went back to Moscow and they
have been protected by the
Russian state ever since. In
fact,
Mr. Putin has given Mr.
Lugovoi a state award.
And it's based on that, that
they come to their conclusions,
and it's pretty damning
conclusions, therefore, for both
President Putin and at the time
the head of the FSB,
Mr. Nikolai Patrushev.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Steven Lee
Myers, does this almost bolster
Putin's image as a tough guy,
as someone that get things done,
even having this out there?
STEVEN LEE MYERS: I don't think
anybody inside the Kremlin
welcomes this kind of attention
or the accusations which again
have been out there the last 10
years.
They have vigorously fought
them. Putin doesn't want to be
portrayed as somebody who would
carry out this kind of attack,
ordering this kind of
assassination. That said,
Litvinenko
was widely reviled in the
Russian elite, especially among
the security services.
And even in the testimony that
is included in the report today,
one of the suspects said
that the killing was meant to
send a message to others who
might betray their oath to the
state in Russia.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Michael
McFaul, I see you agreeing
there. This was a killing that
was
meant to send a message by
that slow, painful death?
MICHAEL MCFAUL: Oh, absolutely.
I mean, he was a traitor.
Remember, he worked for the
KGB, then the FSB, the same
organizations that Mr. Putin and
Patrushev worked for.
He then defected. He then made
these claims -- that's in the
report again -- that the
FSB orchestrated terrorist
attacks against Russian citizens
back in the fall of 1989
as a way to rally Russians
around the flag and support
ultimately President Putin. That
was the first time that
he ran for president.
So there's no doubt that they
hated him. They made that very
clear. And they were sending
a signal. And I want to point
out, there's been a lot of
assassinations, there's been
a lot of killings. Just last
year, the leading figure of the
opposition, Boris Nemtsov, was
murdered, assassinated just a
few feet from the Kremlin walls,
again, with all this ambiguous
notion, actually who
ordered it, who didn't.
But it's a pattern. It's not
just a one-off. And the last
thing I want to remind you of,
even if they didn't make these
calls, right, even if somehow
this was a rogue operation,
that's also pretty damning. That
means that President Putin is
not in charge of his state
and that people within the
regime can carry out
assassinations without his
blessing. That's
also not a very good message
about his control within Russia.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Steven, what's
the response been from Russia
today?
STEVEN LEE MYERS: You know, as
you would expect, and as it has
been from the very beginning,
they have denounced this
investigation. They say that the
accusations that the Russian
state was involved at all is
part of a politically motivated
smear campaign against Russia
and
against Putin himself.
So, you know, it's hard for
them, I think, in Russia to
understand this or accept this
as an independent inquiry. They
say the whole thing was
politicized to come to a
predetermined
conclusion.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Finally,
Michael McFaul, what about the
diplomatic consequences of
this? The U.K. and the U.S. are
kind of in a delicate dance with
Russia right now, especially
when it comes to Syria.
MICHAEL MCFAUL: Well, I think
for Prime Minister Cameron, it's
going to be very difficult,
because they took years to get
over this big interruption in
their bilateral relationship.
And they were just slowly
creeping towards a better
relationship when I was
ambassador,
and then the invasion of
Ukraine set that back.
We're now in this moment, as you
just noted, of trying to
cooperate with Russia on Syria,
both on a political solution,
but also on the fight against
ISIS. And, therefore, I
think they're going to try to do
damage control. That would be my
prediction.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All right,
Michael McFaul, Steven Lee
Myers, thanks so much.
STEVEN LEE MYERS: Thank you.
MICHAEL MCFAUL: Thank you.
HARI SREENIVASAN: The crowded
Republican field running for
president faces the first real
test in less than two weeks,
when voting begins in Iowa and
New Hampshire.
Senator Rand Paul of Kentucky is
hoping young people show up in
big numbers and help him
stand out.
Gwen Ifill sat down with him
earlier today as part of our
Running series.
GWEN IFILL: Senator Paul, thank
you so much for joining us.
SEN. RAND PAUL (R-KY),
Presidential Candidate: Thanks
for having me.
GWEN IFILL: It seems like
the longest race ever.
(LAUGHTER)
GWEN IFILL: And here we are,
about two weeks out before the
first voting in Iowa and then
in New Hampshire.
Donald Trump is surging. Ted
Cruz is surging. How do you
assess the race today?
SEN. RAND PAUL: I think a lot
will be told the night of the
election.
And I think, in some ways, this
is the first election I have
really seen led so much by
polling. And I think polling is
getting more and more inaccurate
over time, because more
and more people are on cell
phones and not really included.
A lot of our support comes
from younger voters, college-age
voters. And I have yet to meet a
college student who has
ever been included in a poll.
So, I think we have to wait and
see how the voters vote. We have
a really good ground
game. Our goal is to get 10,000
students to vote in Iowa.
They're in school for the first
time in several presidential
election cycles, so we think we
have a real shot.
GWEN IFILL: So, explain to me a
little bit more how you do that
in Iowa and how you duplicate
something like that if you
need to in New Hampshire.
SEN. RAND PAUL: President Obama
did very well with students, and
he won the student vote
probably 3-1, and he energized
them and got them out.
We have been doing a lot of the
same thing, working in dorms, on
campus, really trying
to organize dorm by dorm, get
the kids out. We think a lot of
these students aren't wedded
to one party or another yet. But
they're interested in being left
alone.
And part of the theme of my
campaign is, the government
ought to leave people alone. The
government ought shouldn't be
collecting everyone's phone
records. I think young people,
their
life revolves
around their phone.
If I want to talk to my kids and
they're in the basement, I have
to send them a text to
talk to them sometimes. And I
think that they understand as
much or more than anybody else
that the government really
shouldn't have access to all
their records.
GWEN IFILL: And when they pick
up their phones and they want to
look up political news, they
yesterday only read about
Sarah Palin and Donald Trump.
(LAUGHTER)
GWEN IFILL: Sucks all the air
out of the room, including on
those little devices.
SEN. RAND PAUL: Yes.
GWEN IFILL: How do you
break through that?
SEN. RAND PAUL: Maybe not quite
as bad as you would think,
because young people aren't
really watching the traditional.
They're getting things from
their friends. They're getting
things passed around that
are funny or humorous.
And they're not really wedded to
the cable news so much. And I
think it is a disservice,
though, that the news, I think,
has really dumbed the whole
thing down, because it's
been a nonstop Trump circus for
months and months now. If you
add up all the coverage
of all the other candidates,
he's getting 25 times more.
So, is it any surprise that he's
leading in the polls? Which came
first? Was he leading
in the polls or the coverage?
It's been a little bit of both.
But I think it's a disservice
really to the country and to
getting a serious debate,
because, see, I think it's
important
to know who's going to be in
charge of the nuclear weapons.
Trump doesn't seem -- in the
last debate, the CNN debate, he
didn't seem to understand
what the nuclear triad was, that
we have land missiles, sea and
air. And then a week after
the debate, his campaign was
asked, and they said, well, yes,
we knew about nuclear weapons,
and our problem is we haven't
been willing enough to use
nuclear weapons.
And that's a pretty profound and
scary thought, that we would
have someone running who thinks
we need to use our
nuclear weapons more.
GWEN IFILL: Which used to
be a disqualifying thing.
SEN. RAND PAUL: You would think.
GWEN IFILL: But it doesn't
seem like that this year.
It seems that you have said
Donald Trump would destroy the
party. You have said that Ted
Cruz is not authentic. Yet, none
of that seems to -- none of
those criticisms, at least for
you, seem to grab on.
SEN. RAND PAUL: Well, I think we
have simplified the debate too
much and we have made it all
about, well, we're just going to
show -- there was -- I bet you,
of the eight or 10 hours
that people were awake yesterday
they could watch the news that
Trump was on probably
the majority of the time, maybe
80 to 90 percent of the news
cycle, all day long, repeated
over and over again.
And as a consequence, we're not
breaking through to think about.
And I have made the point
is, is that the difference
between Trump and myself is,
Trump wants power. And he thinks
he's so smart that he will fix
everything in the country; just
give him power.
And I understand the corrupting
influence of power and that it
is our American tradition
to worry about having too much
power to gravitate to any
person, and that I want more
power
to be dispersed among the states
and the people, and that I want
the power in Washington to
be constrained by
the Constitution.
That's a completely different
tradition. But I think there
could be an intellectual debate
about which is the better
proposition, give one person all
of the power and let them fix
the country, or acknowledge that
maybe power has a corrupting
influence.
GWEN IFILL: An intellectual
debate sometime in the next two
weeks.
Depending on the turnout of
young people, who we don't know
if they would turn out for
something like an Iowa caucus --
sounds like a tough proposition.
SEN. RAND PAUL: It may be. But
we're working very hard. We have
1,000 precinct chairs in
Iowa. I think that's more than
anyone else has announced.
We announced last week when I
was there that we had made
500,000 phone calls. That's an
enormous project. So, we have
put a lot of work and effort in
it. We will know February
1 whether it works or not.
But I think I guess what's
disappointing to us is that
people think that the election
is already over, it's been
pre-decided. And we haven't even
started. We haven't even had
one vote yet.
GWEN IFILL: Well, that's been
written, especially about your
campaign. And you weren't on the
debate stage last weekend. And
that raised that question.
But I looked at this. And I do
wonder what your grand plan is,
especially -- you have
got a lot of endorsements in New
Hampshire. As you point out, you
have a lot of endorsements
in Iowa. One endorsement like
Sarah Palin seems to blow all
that out of the water.
SEN. RAND PAUL:
Maybe, maybe not.
See, I still think there is a
question of whether Donald Trump
is a conservative. He
spent most of his life as a
progressive Democrat. He was
pro-choice for the vast majority
of
life -- of his life, and now
he says now he's pro-life.
But, really, some of the things
that really energize
conservatives -- when the Tea
Party
movement arose, one of the
things that we were very annoyed
with was bailing out the
big banks, that the middle class
shouldn't have to bail out the
big banks in New York,
and yet Donald Trump
supported that.
Most of us were opposed to
centralizing the control of
health insurance and health in
our country, and the idea that
there would be a single-payer
was something that really
was the opposite of what we
believed in. And he's been for
that as well.
So, really, there are a lot of
things about Donald Trump that
aren't conservative, his
belief in eminent domain, that
the government should take
private property from one
property
owner, and give it to Donald
Trump, basically, for a casino.
That goes against what most
conservatives believe.
GWEN IFILL: Let's talk about
what you believe. You are not
pro-war, anti-war, I think is
fair to say, in a
libertarian sense.
SEN. RAND PAUL: Right.
GWEN IFILL: You also believe
that -- you advocate for
privacy, on behalf of privacy,
as you
alluded to.
Is this the year where that
debate is actually happening,
where people are listening to
that
debate?
SEN. RAND PAUL: I
think very much so.
I think, when the NSA, when it
was discovered that the NSA was
collecting all of our phone
records, I think people
responded. And the vast majority
of particularly young people
were opposed to it. If you --
there was a poll of those taken
under 40; 83 percent of
those under 40 thought the
government went too far in
collecting all our phone
records.
It also hasn't worked. Two
bipartisan commissions have
looked at it and said, you know
what?
We haven't stopped any terrorist
attacks by doing this. Now, I do
think, since the recent
terrorist attacks, people are
like, oh, what are we going to
do? How do we protect ourselves?
But I think there is a
significant amount of people in
my party who do believe, you
know what, the answer isn't to
give up our liberty. The answer
isn't to trade liberty
for a false sense of security.
So, I think we actually are
still winning that debate,
but it is a more difficult
environment because people are
fearful.
GWEN IFILL: You're running for
your Senate seat at the same
time as you run for the
nomination.
A couple things that raises.
Among them, you're running to be
an insider again, which is not
going over well so far, and also
some people say you're trying to
have your cake and eat
it, too.
SEN. RAND PAUL: I wouldn't be
the first. Paul Ryan ran last
year, and ran for both Congress
and the vice presidency.
(CROSSTALK)
GWEN IFILL: Joe Lieberman.
SEN. RAND PAUL:
LBJ, Joe Lieberman.
So, I think there's a long list
of people who have run for two
offices. And it turns
out that that is the way -- the
only way forward for me to put
the message forward and become
part of the national debate.
But we have been very pleased
with the response to this. And I
think I have a unique voice
in the Republican Party. You
have got people like Ted Cruz,
who says he's going to make
the sand glow, once again, sort
of the Donald Trumpism. I think
he's trying to one-up Donald
Trump on how tough
he's going to be.
But, really, we ought to think
through the ramifications of
what happens in the Middle
East, because, so often, our
interventions in the Middle East
have led to consequences
that were unintended, but,
actually, I think, have made us
less safe.
GWEN IFILL: Senator Rand Paul,
good luck on the campaign trail.
Thank you very much.
SEN. RAND PAUL:
Thank you. Thanks.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour":
What does a city need to promote
genius within its community?;
the challenges migrant women
face making the journey to
safety; and an anti-smoking
campaign
that's using real people
and their stories.
Next, a bit of NFL history was
made this week, and not the
usual records book statistic
that
sports announcers
spout on Sunday.
Yesterday, the Buffalo Bills
announced they'd hired the
league's first full-time female
coach. Kathryn Smith is the
team's new special teams quality
control coach. She comes to
the job with 13 years of NFL
experience, first with the New
York Jets, then the Bills.
For more on the move and its
implications, I spoke a short
time ago to sports writer
Christine Brennan of USA Today.
Christine Brennan, it seems
strange to have this
conversation in 2016, but the
first full-time
NFL coach position going to a
woman. Why is this so
significant, besides what I just
said?
CHRISTINE BRENNAN, USA Today:
Yes, well, I think that's it,
and also that I think it's
the beginning of what we're
going to see, Hari, as a big
trend over the next 10, 15,
20 years.
This is Title IX in all of its
manifestations. And it's not
just about girls playing sports
and women playing sports, but
it's about that neighborhood
girl who you watch play sports
who grows up loving sports and
goes to college, as Kathryn
Smith did and works for the
men's
basketball team at St. John's,
as she did, and wants to have a
career in sports.
And she's working in the NFL for
the Jets as an intern. And so
she has over 10, 12 years
of experience already. And Rex
Ryan hires her to be a coach.
And this is her career,
this is her life. She
loves sports that much.
Well, there are millions of
girls and women like that in
this country who are playing
sports and loving it and wanting
to have a career in some form in
the sports world or
at least nearby. And I think
this shows that this is just the
beginning of what I think
will be a very significant
trend moving forward.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Tell me a
little bit about her job. There
are several types of coaches
in the NFL. This doesn't mean
she's the head coach wearing the
stuff on the sidelines.
But what is she going to do?
CHRISTINE BRENNAN: Well, she's
in quality control with the
special teams.
And I'm sure people are saying,
what? There's a lot of coaches.
There are a lot of assistant
coaches on that sideline, a lot
of assistant coaches in the
booth, and even maybe more
important the practices and
working with the players,
working behind the scenes.
And so while it's a little
unclear exactly where she will
be on game day -- my sense
is, she probably will be on the
field -- but she will be working
with the special teams
assistant coach. She will be
probably looking at film,
looking at all kinds of patterns
and schemes and figuring out
what they're doing well on
special teams, deciding if there
is a player or two that should
be moved to special teams or
moved away.
Of course, special teams are the
kicks and the punts, kickoffs,
punts, an integral role
in any NFL game and with any NFL
team. So, it's an important
role. And I think, even
more important, she is a
full-fledged assistant coach,
will be in all meetings with the
entire
staff and Rex Ryan,
who hired her.
And I think that, in and of
itself, Hari, is the
achievement, that she is now at
that
level with all these men who
have been doing this for many
years as well.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And there have
been -- there are women in
high-ranking front office
positions
around the league,
just not on the field.
CHRISTINE BRENNAN: Well, that's
right. And women have owned
teams. Georgia Frontiere
comes to mind with the Rams,
so many others over the years.
In baseball, Marge Schott
controversially owned the
Cincinnati Reds. That is not so
unusual. The difference is here
that this is someone who has
obviously grown up playing
sports and loving sports, and
didn't come in via the ownership
door or for the boardroom,
but -- from the boardroom -- but
the way men have for years, by
working her way up as an
intern through the system.
When you think about it, watch
when players are injured, and
you often now see -- with
college games, you will see a
woman running out as one of the
trainers and working to
assist that player on the
football field, men's
basketball, women's basketball,
et cetera.
Well, again, this shouldn't
surprise us. These women are out
there doing these jobs. And
so from that standpoint, yes,
she has worked her way up the
way so many other people have,
and legitimately deserves this
job. This is no gift. This is
not political correctness.
Rex Ryan would be doing this --
wouldn't be doing that. This is
all about someone who
deserves this job.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Well, while
we're talking about gender
diversity, the question is back
in the NFL again about racial
diversity. It's this time of the
year, when coaches lose their
jobs, or as coaches move teams,
and while we see the hashtag on
the Oscars trending
Oscars so white, NFL is going to
have maybe a similar one coming
up.
CHRISTINE BRENNAN: Well, there
were six minority coaches last
year. And it looks like there
will be six minority coaches
this year out of 32 teams.
That's not even 20 percent,
Hari.
And when you think that the
league itself is 67 percent,
two-thirds, minority players,
boy, if that isn't a disparity
between the players and then the
fact that there is no
trickling up at all to getting
the opportunity to have the head
coaching job.
Again, though, what we were
taking about a moment ago with
Smith, working your way up,
these players need to -- in my
opinion, need to be given the
signal that they are wanted
in the coaching ranks and they
are wanted in administrations.
Often, we see in sports that the
people doing the hiring are
picking those people who look
like them. And as long as it's
white owners, a majority, of
course, white owners, and in
athletic departments, it's a lot
of men picking men now to coach
women's sports, which are
lucrative jobs in college, it's
a very big deal in women's
college sports, losing those
opportunities for women,
having men coach women.
And that should be
unacceptable in 2016.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All right,
Christine Brennan joining us
from Minnesota today, thanks so
much.
CHRISTINE BRENNAN:
And thank you, Hari.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Now, what
helps foster genius,
particularly geography and the
close proximity
of other talented minds?
Our economics correspondent,
Paul Solman, has a look, part of
his weekly Making Sense
series, which airs every
Thursday on the "NewsHour."
PAUL SOLMAN: So we're in the
National Gallery of Art, genius
clusters galore. You want to
explain some to me?
ERIC WEINER, Author, "The
Geography of Genius": Sure.
PAUL SOLMAN: That's journalist
Eric Weiner. For his new book,
"The Geography of Genius,"
he traveled the world and back
in time. So, a museum seemed a
fitting backdrop to hear
what he found. First
stop, ancient Athens.
ERIC WEINER: Athens was one of
the first real global cities in
the world. And so they would
open their doors to foreigners
-- they called them Metics --
they were essentially resident
aliens, who, even though they
knew they posed somewhat of a
national security risk, they
invited them in.
PAUL SOLMAN: And became
cosmopolitan, the first
necessary ingredient for the
genius
cluster every place would
like to have, says Weiner.
Unsurprisingly, the head of
Harvard's Center for
International Development
agrees.
RICARDO HAUSMANN, Harvard Center
for International Development: I
study how places become good
at different things, and how the
things that they're good at
evolve.
PAUL SOLMAN: Professor
Ricardo Hausmann.
RICARDO HAUSMANN: And what I
find is that they tend to
diversify into things that are
somewhat related, but somewhat
more complex or more advanced.
And in the process of
diversifying,
they rely enormously on talent
that came from the outside.
PAUL SOLMAN: Although note, says
Weiner, that these places have
to be big and wealthy enough
to attract top talent.
ERIC WEINER: Almost all of these
genius clusters throughout
history have been cities. And
Athens
wasn't a huge city, but it was
very dense, there were lots of
interactions, and it was
an urban life that we might
recognize today, people trading
and gossiping and getting
together
for these drunken symposia where
they would recite poetry and
drink wine.
PAUL SOLMAN: So, do you believe
it takes a Socrates to make a
Plato?
ERIC WEINER: And a Plato to make
an Aristotle, and an Aristotle
to make an Alexander, if
you will. The point is
that genius is contagious.
PAUL SOLMAN: Professor
Hausmann's research bears this
out.
RICARDO HAUSMANN: Genius is not
really about individuals. It's
really about a collective.
It's about a community
of practice.
PAUL SOLMAN: To Eric Weiner, a
prime example was Renaissance
Florence.
ERIC WEINER: It cannot be a
coincidence that you had not
only a Leonardo da Vinci and a
Michelangelo doing incredible
work in Florence at this
particular time, but you had
Ghiberti
and Brunelleschi and Filippo
Lippi and all of these others.
People were living out of each
other's intellectual pockets.
They were sharing ideas. There
was
enough trust to share your
ideas, but enough tension to
create some sparks.
PAUL SOLMAN:
Competition, you mean?
ERIC WEINER: Absolutely. All of
these golden ages were
competitive places.
Graham Greene once famously said
about Switzerland 500 years of
peace and stability and what
have they brought the
world? The cuckoo clock.
PAUL SOLMAN: Fractious, but
wealthy Florence, by contrast,
brought the world a painter we
still know by one name, Leonardo
-- the National Gallery boasts
America's only painting by
him -- and a rival with whom
we're also on a first-name
basis, Michelangelo.
ERIC WEINER: Michelangelo was
younger, and he was the upstart,
and he was threatening
to Leonardo. But it brought out
the best in both men, and that's
often the case.
PAUL SOLMAN: Well, I think the
first thing I learned about
Leonardo da Vinci is that
he was a renaissance man, right?
ERIC WEINER: He was the original
renaissance man, actually. All
genius is interdisciplinary,
to some degree. They cross
boundaries. And today we have
pigeonholed ourselves so much,
that it's hard to break out.
It's hard for a biologist to
write about physics. It's hard
for an art historian to talk
about aeronautical engineering.
PAUL SOLMAN: One more stop on
the National Gallery tour of
genius geography, the capital
of the Austro-Hungarian Empire,
Vienna, circa 1900,, home to
painters like Gustav Klimt,
Egon Schiele, Oskar Kokoschka.
So, this is our approximation of
a Viennese coffee shop right?
ERIC WEINER: Pretty close. We
have got the coffee. We have got
the desserts.
PAUL SOLMAN: That's true. So
what was it about Vienna?
ERIC WEINER: The Viennese coffee
house was a classic case of
what's known as a third
place. Third places, unlike work
or home, first and second
places, third places like
this are places you go where you
can converse with friends, and
you can converse with strangers,
and people who may not share
your exact political point of
view or your exact intellectual
point
of view.
And it's this mixing of
divergent points of view that
came together in the Vienna of
1900.
PAUL SOLMAN: For Eric Weiner,
the final ingredients of genius
seem pretty clear: a rich city
with
bustle, competition,
cooperation, and, above all,
openness to the new, the
foreign.
ERIC WEINER: Vienna was a city
of immigrants in 1900, a lot of
immigrants from throughout
the Austro-Hungarian Empire,
including Sigmund Freud, who was
an immigrant, and they came
together and they brought fresh
ideas, and they shook up the
status quo.
It was a demographic earthquake
that changed Vienna and that
made it, at the time, the
greatest city in the world.
PAUL SOLMAN: Much as America,
because of our openness to fresh
ideas and people, has been
called the greatest country.
But can we afford to stay so
open in an increasingly
menacing, terror-mad world?
Development expert Hausmann
responded with data.
RICARDO HAUSMANN: In the U.S.,
25 percent of employers are
foreign-born. In Silicon
Valley, over 50 percent of
start-ups created by people who
were born abroad.
PAUL SOLMAN: As we left
Harvard's Kennedy School of
Government, where Venezuelan
Hausmann
and so many other immigrants
teach, I had one last question:
How bad would it be for
the economy if America
became less open?
RICARDO HAUSMANN: Well, it
definitely is going to cost. We
should remember that Steve Jobs'
parents were Syrian. And there
are plenty of Syrians we're not
letting in.
PAUL SOLMAN: Well, only the dad
was from Syria. Still, some of
those we're not letting in
may father or be potential
geniuses. Others, well, who
knows? The fact is, when it
comes
to cooking up genius clusters
anywhere, from ancient Greece to
Renaissance Italy to high-tech
America, there may be key
ingredients, but the recipe is
awfully hard to follow.
Economics correspondent Paul
Solman, reporting for the "PBS
NewsHour."
HARI SREENIVASAN: Now we
continue our look at the
desperate journey facing
refugees seeking
safe haven in Europe.
Today, President Obama spoke
with German Chancellor Angela
Merkel about how significant a
challenge
the wave of new refugees pose.
The two leaders agreed to
galvanize global support at a
conference
in London next month and call
for a global refugee summit at
the U.N. General Assembly
in September.
Judy Woodruff recently recorded
this look at the crisis.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Last year saw
more than one million refugees
and migrants enter Europe
from the Middle East, from
Southwest Asia and Africa.
Many are fleeing brutal wars and
violence at home, and making
often perilous journeys
in search of safety. There are
serious risks along the route,
but these are often harsher
for women.
To explore the challenges and
dangerous faced by women amid
this refugee crisis, I'm joined
by Sarah Costa. She's the
executive director of the
Women's Refugee Commission. It's
a
nonprofit advocacy and awareness
group that focuses on the needs
of women and children
in humanitarian emergencies. She
returned from a fact-finding
mission in Greece and
Macedonia just
before the new year.
Sarah Costa, welcome.
Tell us what is known about the
women who are making this
journey right now.
SARAH COSTA, Executive Director,
Women's Refugee Commission:
Well, what we know in all
humanitarian
crisis -- and this is no
exception -- that women face
heightened risks of violence and
exploitation and heightened
risks of all forms of
gender-based violence.
And what we have also seen in
our journey -- in fact, we have
been in Greece, Macedonia,
Serbia and Slovenia -- what we
have seen is that
systematically, the protection
risks
for women and girls in
particular are not being taken
into account.
There are not adequate
protection services on the
ground to both identify and
prioritize
women's needs.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And is this
something that has grown worse
during this crisis, or has
it been like this all along?
SARAH COSTA: This is an
unprecedented crisis. I mean,
the magnitude and the speed of
the
migration, we haven't
seen in other times.
And what's failing here are the
services and the countries
responsible for those services
to put in place the protection
pieces that need to be put in
place. I mean, what we have
seen is that the humanitarian
agencies were quite slow to come
into this crisis, because
I think governments
felt they could manage.
But they're not managing
particularly well. We are
failing women and girls on this
route.
And it is, as you said in your
introduction, a very treacherous
route.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But how much is
known about what portion, what
proportion of these refugees
are women and where
they're coming from?
SARAH COSTA: Well, we do know,
from the statistics of the
International Organization on
Migration,
that the number of women has
been increasing steadily.
I think when we saw those first
pictures right at the beginning
of the coverage by the media,
people were only focused on the
men, and there certainly were a
lot of men. But what we have
seen during our assessment is
that more and more women are
coming, and women with families,
women traveling alone, women
traveling alone with children.
So, we think it's probably now
about 40 percent are women. And
we know that at least 37 percent
are coming directly from Syria,
which tells us about the
worsening conditions in Syria.
And their stories are horrific.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Give us a sense
of that. What are they saying?
SARAH COSTA: Well, what we hear
is that they basically have had
very little food, very
little access to water. They are
fearful of violence every day.
They have seen their families
killed around them.
And they have made this choice
that it would be better to take
a rubber dinghy across the
Aegean Sea than stay in their
hometowns in Syria. But we have
also heard stories from
women who have been in Lebanon
and Jordan that their conditions
have deteriorated over
time.
They're not legally allowed, as
you probably know, to work. And
their savings have diminished.
And they're finding it very,
very difficult to survive.
There's a huge funding gap in
humanitarian aid, I should add.
But they're unable to survive.
Their children are not
in school. And they're
pretty desperate.
You will hear from women that
they feel that they have no
option than to put themselves
in harm's way by getting
into a rubber dinghy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: What needs to
happen? What do these women
need?
SARAH COSTA: Well, first, we
need, you know, safe and legal
alternatives. I mean, the fact
that people are taking such a
treacherous journey, I think
there are other ways of
addressing
this issue.
But while they are on the route,
we need to make sure that there
are protection services
in place. We need to make sure
that we do have gender and
gender-based violence experts
who can identify those who are
most vulnerable, who can try and
prioritize services for them.
And we need to make sure that
they have access to some of the
most basic services such as
reproductive health care. A very
large number of the women that
we interviewed are pregnant.
We know that, in this kind of
crisis, probably one in five
could be pregnant. And at least
15 percent are going to have
complications during that
pregnancy.
And what we saw are women giving
birth on route, not really being
able to stop at a
health care center, feeling
that, if they stop and recover
from giving birth, that they
will miss the opportunity to
migrate to the destination
countries, which, as you know,
are Germany -- for a lot of
people, Germany and Sweden. And
they just feel that they cannot,
cannot stop, and they will be
separated from their family
members.
But one of the key factors for
people is to get the right
information. What we see that
increases the protection risks
for women and children, for that
matter, is that they do
not know anything about where
they're going, what time trains
will be going, what time
the buses that are going to take
them over the border are going
to arrive.
And so when there are some
services available, they're not
using them.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, it
sounds terribly chaotic.
And just finally, I would say
that all this is happening as
European countries are
increasingly
either closing or tightening
their borders because of the
rising fear of terrorism.
SARAH COSTA: You know, we have
to remember and we must remember
in this discussion about
terrorism that refugees are
fleeing violence, they're
fleeing the kind of terror we're
talking
about, and that they are the
first victims of this violence,
and that they are not the
source of the violence.
So, when we talk about security
-- obviously, security is a
very, very legitimate concern
-- we must also think about the
safety and the human rights of
the refugees.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Sarah Costa, the
executive director of the
Women's Refugees Commission,
we thank you very much.
SARAH COSTA: Well, thank you.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Next: getting
smokers to quit and the impact
of a government campaign
against tobacco.
Five years ago, the Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention
launched the first federal
education campaign against
smoking. That includes an ad
campaign called "Tips From
Former Smokers."
Five years later, the government
says it has helped 400,000
smokers quit for good, and
led millions of others
to try quitting.
Jeffrey Brown spoke with CDC
Director Dr. Thomas Frieden
about it and tobacco as a public
health problem.
JEFFREY BROWN: Dr. Frieden,
welcome once again.
"Tips From Former Smokers," now,
why do you think this approach
and this kind of ad is
the right way to go?
DR. THOMAS FRIEDEN, Director,
Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention: Most Americans
who have ever smoked have
already quit. Most people who
still smoke want to quit.
Hard-hitting ads like these help
them quit. And over the past
five years, hundreds of
thousands of Americans have
stopped smoking because these
courageous people have been
willing to share their stories
of pain and suffering, so other
people don't have to go
through the same problem
that they're going through.
JEFFREY BROWN: All right, I want
to show one, so our audience can
get a flavor for what
you're talking about.
This is a woman from Tennessee.
Let's take a look at that.
KRISTY, Tennessee: I'm Kristy.
As a truck driver, I had a lot
of time to smoke. I also
had severe shortness of
breath and a smoker's cough.
I knew I had to quit. So, for
six months, I used e-cigarettes.
Then I stopped. But the
whole time, I kept smoking
regular cigarettes, right up
until my lung collapsed. My tip
is,
just cutting down on
cigarettes isn't enough.
JEFFREY BROWN: Dr. Frieden,
what's the argument here, that
these ads work better than
anything
else or in conjunction with
other things? How much of a
factor are you suggesting they
are?
DR. THOMAS FRIEDEN: These
ads are important.
A comprehensive tobacco control
program drives smoking rates
down the most and protects kids
the best. That includes high
prices for tobacco through tax
or minimum price. That includes
making public places smoke-free,
so people don't get exposed to
secondhand smoke. That
includes helping smokers quit,
because medications can double
or triple your odds of
succeeding
if you try to quit, and
hard-hitting ads like this.
And hard-hitting ads like this
work. We have proven time and
again. And they work and at
an amazing cost-effectiveness.
(CROSSTALK)
JEFFREY BROWN: Explain that,
though, if I could interrupt
you.
How do you measure success?
Because you know there has been
a lot of debate about the
effectiveness
of this kind of advertising.
DR. THOMAS FRIEDEN: And this
kind of advertising is actually
very well proven to work. There
is no scientific doubt about it.
We have different ways of
surveying people, of monitoring
behavior. We track the calls
to quit lines. Every time these
ads are on the air, quit line
calls skyrocket. And then
we have analyzed people who call
the quit line and try to quit,
people who don't call
the quit line and try to quit
when these ads are on and when
these ads are off.
And we have shown really
definitively in the prior year
campaigns that the impact is
quite
large and life-saving. In fact,
for every $400 we spend on these
ads, we prevent -- we
prolong someone's life by at
least a year. And for every
$3,000 we spend on these ads,
we save somebody's life.
JEFFREY BROWN: And so the
evidence is that it lasts
long-term? Surely, some of these
people would call the quit line,
try to give up, and then not
succeed and go back to smoking.
DR. THOMAS FRIEDEN: A lot of
people don't succeed the first
time, so we have looked
at long-term quitting.
And if you stay off cigarettes
for six or 12 months, the
likelihood is, you're going
to stay off for life and for a
much healthier life as well.
JEFFREY BROWN: The woman in that
ad mentioned e-cigarettes. And
that, for you, is part of
this as well, right, as more
people turn to that. You are
also trying to say that is not
a solution?
DR. THOMAS FRIEDEN: Well, on
e-cigarettes, first off, for
kids, no form of tobacco is
safe. They shouldn't be using
e-cigarettes or any form of
tobacco.
For adults who try to quit, it
will only really make a
difference in your health and
make
you avoid the problems of --
allow you to avoid the problems
of smoking if you quit
completely. The key is
to quit completely.
If e-cigarettes allow you to
quit completely, great for you.
But for most people who are
using e-cigarettes, they're
still smoking, and that's a
problem.
JEFFREY BROWN: And, finally,
when you put this in the big
picture, the general trends
for smoking in the U.S. still
heading in the right direction?
DR. THOMAS FRIEDEN: We have made
progress, but, still, more than
40 million Americans
smoke.
And every year, 480,000
Americans are killed by tobacco.
And for everyone who dies,
another
30 live with disabling,
disfiguring conditions from
tobacco. It remains the leading
preventable
cause in this country, and we
can do more to reduce smoking
rates and protect our kids.
JEFFREY BROWN: Dr. Thomas
Frieden of the CDC, thanks so
much.
DR. THOMAS FRIEDEN:
Thank you very much.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And now
another in our Brief But
Spectacular series, where we ask
interesting
people to describe
their passion.
Tonight, we hear from writer
A.J. Jacobs, an editor at
"Esquire" and the author of
several
books, including "My Life as an
Experiment: One Man's Humble
Quest to Improve Himself."
He explains his unique brand
of immersive journalism.
A.J. JACOBS, Author, "My Life as
an Experiment: One Man's Humble
Quest to Improve Himself":
One of the secrets I have
learned is self-deception.
If you pretend to be a little
bit of a better person, you
actually become a better person.
It's easier to act your way into
a new way of thinking than to
think your way into a
new way of acting. I didn't make
that up, by the way, but I love
it.
I have been called the human
guinea pig, and I don't mind. I
think it's a fine title. I'm
a writer. And what I like to do
is just dive into my topics,
totally immerse myself, and
change my lifestyle.
I have done dozens of
experiments over the years. One
I did was called, what would
George
Washington do? I followed the
list of 110 rules of life that
the father of our country
wrote when he was a young man.
Some of them you might expect,
like honor your elders,
others not so expected.
The second rule in this list is,
do not adjust your private parts
in public, solid rule.
I have no problem with the rule,
but I would have put it a little
bit lower, like 85, 86.
I did one experiment called
radical honesty, the idea that
whatever is on your brain should
come out of your mouth, no
filter. That was one of the
worst months of my life. I feel
very lucky that I'm still
married and I still have a job,
because you can't believe the
number of lies that we
tell on a daily basis.
I also did an experiment where I
tried to follow all the rules of
the Bible for a year.
I had to wear no mixed fibers. I
did stone adulterers, although I
used very small stones,
like pebble-sized,
so no one got hurt.
My latest project, I'm helping
to build a family tree of the
entire world. I have learned
about all these distant cousins,
including Barack Obama, who is
literally my fifth great
aunt's husband's brother's
wife's seventh great nephew.
That is true and verifiable.
I actually think everyone should
try experimenting with their
lives. You don't need to grow a
huge beard and live by the rules
of the Bible. You can try not
gossiping for a week, or try
to -- a different toothpaste or
a new way to get to work,
anything to jostle the neurons
and create these new pathways,
and just make your life a little
more interesting.
My name is A.J. Jacobs, and this
is my Brief But Spectacular take
on my life as an experiment.
HARI SREENIVASAN: You can find
more of our Brief But
Spectacular episodes on our
Facebook
page, Facebook.com/NewsHour.
And a news update before we
leave you tonight. The water
crisis in Flint, Michigan, has
forced
the regional director of the
Environmental Protection Agency
to resign. The EPA also
issued an emergency order to
ensure the state and city
immediately take actions to
protect
human health.
On the "NewsHour" online: Najat
Abdul Samad was a young girl in
Syria when she began writing
poems and stories. Today, she is
one of the literary voices
speaking out from the war-torn
country about what she calls
Syria's threat to existence. You
can find an interview with
her, and two of her newly
translated pieces, on our Web
site, PBS.org/NewsHour.
And that's the "NewsHour" for
tonight. I'm Hari Sreenivasan.
Join us online and again here
tomorrow evening with Ruth
Marcus and David Brooks.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank you. Have a
good night.